good afternoon everybody
we now have reason to hope that by
spring
community testing and vaccines will
combine to end this era of
restrictions but to get there we must
first navigate
a hard winter when the burden on our nhs
is heaviest
and the cold weather favors the virus
the data already suggests that national
measures in england have slowed
and in some places reversed the growth
of new cases
and as more data comes in we hope and
expect to see those trends
continue together we have prevented
rnhs from being overwhelmed
but those dangers have not gone up gone
away
if we ease off now we risk losing
control of this virus
all over again casting aside our
hard-won gains and forcing us back
into a new year national lockdown with
all the
damage that would mean the tough
measures in our winter plan
are the best way to avoid this outcome
all our friends around the world are
grappling
with the same question of how to keep
people safe
without retreating into a winter of
hibernation
in italy there's a nightly curfew
in germany hospitality will remain
closed until the 20th of december
and in france until the 20th of january
across the whole of the uk measures
remain in place to control the virus
under our winter plan england will
return to a tiered system
of local restrictions our decisions
on which enter which area enters which
tier
are based on public health advice
according to five
indicators cases across
all ages especially the over 60s the
rate
by which cases are rising or falling
the percentage of those tested in a
local population
who have covid and the pressure on the
nhs
we're publishing data packs setting out
the reasons behind the decisions
in each area to find out how this
affects you log on to gov dot uk
where all the information is available
i'm sorry to confirm that from wednesday
most of england
will be in the top two tiers with the
toughest measures and
i know that this will bring a great deal
of of heartache and frustration
especially for our vital hospitality
sector
our pubs our restaurants our hotels in
so many ways the soul
of our communities and which
continue to bear a disproportionate
share
of the burden i really wish it were
otherwise but if we're going to keep
schools open
as we must then our options in bearing
down on the disease
are necessarily limited
what we will do is continue taking every
possible step
to protect jobs and livelihoods across
the uk
these tougher tiers strike a balance
they're sufficient to continue
driving the virus downwards but it's
important to recognize
they're less intrusive than the current
national
measures in all tiers
shops gyms the leisure sector
hairdressers other forms of personal
care
places of worship will reopen you will
no longer be instructed to stay at home
though you should continue to work from
home if you can
the rule of six will once again apply in
public outdoor spaces
and organize outdoor sport can
can begin again but there's no doubt
that the restrictions
in all tiers are tough and i'm sorry
about that
while the data is beginning to improve
the virus
is still prevalent and the faster we
drive it down
the faster we can lift restrictions and
that's exactly what these new tiers are
designed
to achieve while the
previous tiers slowed the spread of the
virus
they were never quite enough to cut the
odd the the reproduction rate of the
disease the r
down below one and keep it there so
areas did not escape whatever level
they were placed in our new approach is
to reduce
design to reduce r below one opening a
path for areas to move
down the scale as soon as the situation
improves and crucially we now have the
means
to accelerate that moment of escape
with rapid community testing allowing
anyone carrying the disease including
those
without symptoms to isolate and thereby
reducing the r and the truth is
that at least one in three people with
kobit
have no symptoms at all and may be
spreading it
spreading the disease without even
knowing that they've got it
the only way to identify them and
protect
everyone is through mass testing and
liverpool shows
what can be achieved in in liverpool in
the space of two and a half weeks
over 240 000 tests have been conducted
and together with the effect of the
national restrictions
this has helped to reduce the number of
cases in liverpool
city region by more than two-thirds so
having previously been in tier three
liverpool city region and warrington
will now be in tier two this is a
success story which we want other parts
of the
country to replicate so we'll work with
local government with
public health leaders and our fantastic
uh fantastic armed forces
to offer community testing to tier three
areas
as quickly as possible opening the way
for them to follow liverpool's example
now testing on this scale is untried
but in due course if it works
where people test negative it may also
be
possible for families and communities to
released from certain restrictions even
if
their home area stays in in tier three
the allocation of tears will be reviewed
every
14 days starting on the 16th of december
so your tier is not your destiny every
area
has the means of escape and i have no
doubt
that together we can get through this
winter suppress the
virus until vaccines come to our aid
and then we can reclaim our lives and
all the things that we love i'm now
going to ask
patrick to go through some of the slides
and we'll go to chris
thank you very much prime minister this
is the first slide
um showing the estimated number of
people
testing positive in england over time so
this is from the office for national
statistics
survey and it runs from august through
to
november and what you can see is that
the number of cases and they're shown in
hundreds of thousands
started to increase in september and the
end of august and september
and you'll see a bigger increase as we
went into october a
sharper rise in the number of cases
the first bar shows the
when the tiers were introduced and as
you can see
after the first set of tiers were
introduced initially
the rate of increase of the number of
cases continued
but then it started to come down a
little bit so the rate of increase came
down
and the reason for this is that in tier
one we saw cases continue to increase
and tier one really didn't have an
effect to slow
the rate of increase tier two
started to hold the rate of increase so
we started to see that in some places
you could hold it back
but it certainly wasn't turning it down
and in tier
three and those are the areas with the
most cases the tier three restrictions
really started to hold it back and in
some cases led to a decrease in the
number of cases so what you can see
over that period that the tears were in
place is that
overall there was a clear slowing of the
rate of increase
but it hadn't turned the whole thing
into
going into a negative situation and
shrinking
the second bar shows when the national
restrictions were introduced on the 5th
of november
and here you can see that as the
national restrictions start to work
not only have we now got a flattening
the numbers aren't going up
but they look as though they're
beginning to come down and we would
expect that to continue
so the latest data suggests 1 in 85
people have the disease it's still a
very high number of people that we've
got and that's why we need
not just to hold it flat but to try and
reduce it
but the overall effect and the national
restrictions has been to stop this
and potentially now lead to a decrease
we would expect to continue to see that
decrease
over the next few weeks so on cases it's
turned the corner
by the look of the data we have now next
slide please
if we look at hospitalizations and this
graph shows the first peak
back in march the number of people in
hospitals and you can see this is in
in thousands so that was above 20 000
people in hospital at the peak there
and then you can see the second peak
that we're in now
and you can see that there's about
fifteen thousand or so people in
hospital
with um covid now so there's been an
increase in the number of
hospitalizations that have followed the
increase in the number of infections
and again the two bars show
when the tiers were introduced on the
12th of october
and when the national restrictions came
in on the 5th of november
and what you can see after the national
restrictions came in
that there's a slowing of the rate of
hospitalizations and again
this looks as though this is now
flattened off
still at a high level we need to see
that start coming down
but you can see this is flat and it's no
longer going up
next slide please and unfortunately
as we know that sadly as we get
infections and as we get
hospitalizations
we will see some people dying from this
disease
and again this shows the first peak back
in march
and then coming right down over the
summer
and the increase again as we come into
this second wave of the infection
and what you see again is when the
october
tears were introduced we still saw an
increase in deaths
and after the national lockdown measures
were introduced that begins to slow a
little bit
but i would expect to see that continue
to carry on
unfortunately at a higher level for a
while because there's a lag
between infections hospitalizations and
then unfortunately those people
who succumb to this disease so we would
expect to see
this start flattening off over the next
few weeks and then again
hopefully decreasing as the infections
and hospitalizations come
down so the message is that the tears
worked
in terms of slowing but didn't work in
terms of flattening and reversing it
the national lockdown looks as though
it's flattened it and
sending it downwards and it's important
that we do bring it down because numbers
remain high
i'll hand over to chris thank you so um
number 10 kindly produced an animation
which shows
how over time this has got
further and further into the country and
concentrated in particular areas
the darker the color the more covid
there is
and will then pause right on the last
moment
and this is where we are at the moment
and as you can see
things were beginning to lighten in some
of the areas
uh all around the country but there
remain some areas
quite a number of areas with really very
high rates
indeed many of them coming down not
absolutely all of them
and if we can go on to the next slide
the final slide please what you then
have
uh is a process of looking at
all the data and these are the things
which the prime minister was talking
about in his speech
looking at the rates of people in all
ages
then we take a look at the second second
look at the rates in people over 60
because
those are the group who are most likely
to translate into
people who go into hospital into the nhs
and
who die we also have to look at the rate
at which things
are changing so for example in many
areas of the north of england now
the rates are very high but are
beginning to fall or
are falling consistently but there are
some areas for example in parts of kent
where the rates are still going up we
look
at the positivity rate what proportion
of people tested a positive because that
is important in case we're not testing
enough
and then importantly we also look at
what the pressure is
on the nhs in each of the different
areas
so how much problems are there in
hospitals what proportion of the beds
are taken up
are people having to cancel routine
operations
or even considering having to cancel
more urgent care
so these are the things that we're
taking into account technically
and getting advice from local public
health experts from around the country
and then that is what goes into making
the decisions
on the tiers which ministers make the
final decisions on
and just to reiterate the point that
patrick made
at the beginning tier one which is very
similar to the previous tier one slowed
things down but did not stop the rise
anywhere so the reason why tier one at
this time of year
with the current measures we've
currently got before we have any
vaccines
is relatively limited is almost
certainly anywhere that goes into tier
one will rise and the only places
that are there are places with very low
rates uh at the moment
tier two looks as if it is strong enough
to
hold the line so stop things rising
but not reliably to pull things down
and tier three we think based on
previous experience is strong enough to
pull things down
from a higher peak so the two situations
in particular we were three situations
we would use this is if
there's a lot of the virus around it
needs to come down if the nhs locally is
under a lot of pressure
or if the rates are beginning to rise
despite everything that's there and
these are the things that feed into the
decisions
that ministers finally take thank you
very much brilliant thank you very much
patrick thank you chris let's go to
questions from the public first of all
go to get in
from uh warwick all the governments
consider
allowing schools to shift to remote
forms of learning
in the final week of this half term to
prevent
staff and families of school-aged
children from running that risk of a
bubble closure
which would consequently lead to those
individuals
needing to self-isolate over the
christmas period
and therefore not see their friends and
family
well getting thanks very much we want to
keep
pupils young people in school as much as
we possibly can
uh obviously where it's possible to uh
to to learn uh remotely that can be a
that can be a good thing and we've
increased the supply of uh of laptops i
think about 200 000 laptops that we've
supplied
to schools but on the whole we want to
see
uh pupils kids in school to get the
benefit of learning and
this is vital for social justice we also
want to see
exams going ahead because
it is also very very important that
young people should get the
credentials and the qualifications they
need
so that's why we're taking these
these tough decisions uh alas uh it does
mean bearing down on the virus across
lots of other bits of
of society but schools really are a
priority
anyone on on on schools thank you
uh very much getting richard from
lancaster
richard from lancaster asks will the new
vaccines work
when the covid virus mutates or will new
vaccines need to be developed regularly
akin uh to the flu vaccine i think
that's probably uh one
uh for you patrick and and chris yes so
the vaccines are really showing very
good uh efficacy
and um it tells us that we are going to
end up with lots of vaccine options i
think across the world which is
incredibly important and
a very exciting development viruses do
mutate
as they replicate this virus doesn't
mutate as often as for example flu virus
does but it does mutate
none of those mutations so far have done
anything which changes the behavior of
the virus in any significant way as far
as we can tell
and none of the mutations that occurred
so far would be ones that you would
expect to make the vaccine less
effective but it is possible that as
the vaccines work and they put pressure
on the virus that the virus mutates and
other
forms arise which would require new
vaccines in due course so i don't think
it's the case that
the vaccines that we've got now will be
the vaccines that we use forever we may
have to get new ones that
adapt to the changing virus but what's
very clear
is that with these different
technologies and the different
approaches
it's it is possible to make vaccines and
after all
a new flat flu vaccine is made every
year because of mutations so it's
possible to make those changes
but at the moment there's nothing to
suggest that there's any mutation which
would make the vaccines ineffective
one reason you may have to have multiple
vaccinations
uh is because of mutation as with flu
but another one is that there are many
diseases where you have to
top up the vaccine on a regular basis so
there are some vaccines you can give
once probably for practical purposes for
life
things like mmr you just take a course
of mmr and that will protect most people
for life
but there are some many vaccines for
example travelers take
you would have to take every two or
three years because immunity begins to
wane and you need to top it up again so
there are two possible reasons we may
have to have a situation
where people are not just not vaccinated
just on one once
one course of vaccination but we may
have to repeat it subsequently
thank you both very much and uh thank
you richard let's go to laura koonsberg
of the bbc
thank you prime minister um some people
watching tonight might wonder what's
going
on you've said this week that people
will be able to travel all over the
country at christmas which of course
will bring
risks but now you're clamping down again
what was the point
of the national lockdown in england over
the last four
weeks if more people are moving into
tougher restrictions than before
and if i could ask the medics would it
be preferable and safer in your view if
more people were in tier three
and are you concerned about some doubts
being raised about the oxford vaccine
well laura it's very very important for
everybody to understand that
what's happening next week from midnight
on tuesday for wednesday
this is not continuing the lock down on
on the contrary across all tiers uh
shops will be open
uh hairdressers personal services will
be open
gyms uh will be uh functioning
uh places of worship will be open for
for communal
worship as well so this is this is a
very different thing but what we've got
to do
is keep our eye on the prize and
remember that you know in just a few
months
we will have a vaccine i'm absolutely
convinced of it now and i'm convinced uh
you know
chris has finally talked me into it uh
that by april
uh things genuinely will be much much
better
but what we want to avoid is relaxing
uh now too much and you're taking our
foot off the throat of the beast
now when we've when we've got it uh
you know pretty much where uh in a much
much better place than it was
before the autumn measures came in so
there is a substantial uh
relaxation across all tiers but we're
not
abandoning the the the fight yet of
course not because
we still as i say have long months ahead
and i think the
the strategy is balanced and it is it is
right and
the key thing is that for those
communities that are in
tier three or uh and who feel that
they've endured so much for
for so long and who see weeks and months
ahead of further
hardship i'm thinking particularly of
the hospitality sector
we now have this option laura of
of mass testing and i you know i've been
going on about this for
weeks and weeks but it is there we saw
in liverpool
how it definitely helped uh
listen to what joe anderson is saying
today it definitely i thank the people
of liverpool
uh for what they they have done it
helped to bring
the r down to bring the rate of
infection down and that is something
that i think people can take
great heart and confidence from that's
something that
we will make available throughout the
worst affected areas
for communities to take up and that's
again like the vaccine
that's something that's very different
from the world
uh that we were in just a few weeks ago
in terms of the tearing uh i think
something we've all
said repeatedly is there are damaging
things that happen everywhere we go
if we do too much then we end up
damaging
socially economically in a variety of
different ways which are really obvious
to people
and if we do too little then the virus
gets out of control are goes above one
and it starts to increase again
and what we're trying to do the whole
time is do the least damaging
thing we can possibly do and therefore
the way we've done
this on this occasion and there will
have to be some adjustment we hope
downwards primarily
but there will have to be over time is
to try and
only put places into tier three where
the rates are either high or
rising if they are broadly stable or
falling from a relatively low base but
we think they would rise again they go
into tier two
and we are keen to avoid doing anything
we do not have to do
but at the same time to do enough to
ensure that we keep our below one and
that's the reason
why things are in the tiers uh they are
at the moment because safety is not just
about kobed
safety builds about the whole package of
everything that is uh to do about health
and wider society and a brief comment on
the oxford vaccine i think patrick will
want to comment more
i think my my simple answer to this is
uh there's always
scientific debate about virtually
everything the key thing from our point
of view
uh is to leave this in the hands of
the regulator the excellent mhra
regulator
they will make an assessment with lots
of data that is not currently in public
domain
on efficacy and on safety and we will
see the papers published
in peer-reviewed journals which will
allow us to make a wider decision
about what needs to happen and we need
to use it allow that process
to go forward i think it's always a
mistake to make too many judgments early
before we have the full information and
in particular before the regulator the
independent regulator
has had their chance to look at the data
and make an assessment i agree i mean
we've seen the headline results of 70
efficacy of the vaccine the regulator's
got to look at the whole thing
they'll see the total result set
efficacy safety of a lot
and we've got a great regulator in the
in the uk and they'll look at it and
they'll they'll make their
decisions around it so i think you know
headline results
this vaccine works and that's very
exciting
and it's going to be put forward for
approval
the regulators will need to look at it
and decide and that will be true for all
of the vaccines
thank you so much let's go to robert
pestern idv
prime minister at one of these press
conferences a few months ago you said
there would be no return
to austerity but because of covid we're
borrowing
at a completely unsustainable rate uh
amounts we haven't seen
since the second world war you are going
to have to cut spending and raise taxes
aren't you um and on
the local the new regional restrictions
only the isles of silly and white and
cornwall
are in the lowest areas of restriction
everywhere else is
broadly subject to semi lockdown
and you wanted to whack a mole
why didn't it work and if um
patrick valance and chris woody have
views on why whack-a-mole didn't work
that would be helpful
yeah well first of all on your uh your
point about the
the uk economy and uh and tax and
spending
and so forth you'll have heard from uh
the the chancellor
yesterday i think he set out uh not just
a package to help this country
uh bounce back from uh from covid and to
help us through
covid but uh but it gives us the the
building blocks for
long-term growth in the economy in
productivity taking some of the really
difficult decisions uh to
to build long-term prosperity for for
the uk and
uh i'm i'm very very confident about the
the path that
that we're on but it will of course need
uh it will need fiscal prudence and that
you of course you will get from
uh from this government uh on your
question
about uh the whole uh
local versus national lockdown uh
strategy
um actually i think if you listen to
what uh patrick said earlier on
uh the tiered approach uh was delivering
it was slowing
uh the virus down and that's why a
tiered regional approach
is the right way to go now i think uh if
you look at the the disparity in
uh in incidents in some places between
some parts of the uk
and others uh you want to go for a uh
for a tiered depreciation and again i
repeat the
the message i give them those parts of
the country that
unquestionably will feel that they've
unfairly been put in a
high tier there is hope there is this
option that liverpool has taken up of of
mass community
testing everybody working together to
kick curve it out
work together to kick kobe down get a
test in your
local community and drive the r down
drive the incidents down that's a for me
that's a a real
change in the way we've been able to
deal with the disease
uh that we've we've achieved just in the
last
few few weeks or so i think
one important thing i just add to what
the prime minister said is
i think you've got to remember the
seasonality of this uh there was a
period over the summer where not just
the uk but across europe
uh rates were very low at a huge uh
after a huge effort by all of society to
bring them down and there was a period
where it was actually possible to hold
things at quite a low level
but then across europe across the whole
continent really you're now seeing the
rates going up as we come into
the autumn and winter period and this is
very similar to many other respiratory
viruses
we're about to hit the flu season we
haven't yet quite done so
and we hope that that won't be even
worse than where we are at the moment so
there's a bunch of things you have to do
in this season which are greater than
you'd have to do to achieve
exactly the same effect earlier on in
the year and of course that will reverse
once we come into the spring season
uh the other side so i think it is
important to understand that
there is there is a seasonal element the
second uh
and that also applies to the pressures
on the nhs so our head room
in the nhs just naturally goes down as
we go into the winter months so we have
less room for maneuver on that side of
the equation it's not the only
consideration but it's one of them in
terms of the tearing
again there are tears that would work in
the
spring summer very early autumn months
which i would not expect
to work at this stage and as vaccines
get rolled out assuming they get
approved by the regulator i really want
to put that
caveat in as a very very important one
we would expect there to be a situation
where little by little bits of the
country can start to
sort of walk out of this down the tiers
as we head towards a period where we
hope that the restrictions will be very
substantially less than
than than they are obviously at the
moment
and so the tears will have a very useful
uh
activity in what i would hope is that in
you know
some months to come possibly even some
weeks to come we'd be in a situation
where more places could go into tier one
but we should not do that until we're
confident because the experience of tier
one previously was
and it isn't really changed if you're in
tier one the rates start to go up so you
do not want to do that
in winter just before christmas going
into the worst time of the nhs
unless you're very confident indeed so
that's the reason that this particular
approach has been taken and i think
making sure that
the tier is strong enough to keep it
under control in winter and it's strong
enough for what the
local situation is to handle it because
going too low and watching cases rise
just means everybody ends up getting
more and you end up having to do much
more drastic measures you've got to go
in
hard enough for the current situation in
order to get things down with an
r below one and that's more difficult as
chris says
in the winter than it is in the summer
yeah madness is doing the same thing
twice and expecting different results
correct uh let's go to beth ruby of sky
news thanks robert
thank you prime minister um liverpool is
one of the success stories today but it
did
take maths testing and 2 000 troops
helping out
so how are you going to deliver mass
testing
to 40 of the population are you going to
have to deploy
the entire british army and to the
scientists
um professor whitian and sir patrick um
professor whittaker you said earlier
this week that loosening at christmas
comes with a risk
42 percent of the population were in
tier one before the lockdown
uh now just one percent of the
population in tier one
are you trying to anticipate in the
decisions you've taken
the inevitable rising cases over that
five five-day christmas
period by being tougher with people
before
and probably after two
yeah beth really good really good
question about uh about mass testing and
how it works and i don't want to you
know oversell how easy it is to
to do this it depends on strong local
leadership
of the kind we've seen in uh in
liverpool and and you know real spirit
in the community
who want to do it and it's also got to
be stressed that it it's only
part of the uh of the panoply of uh
of uh interventions that you need to
defeat the disease
you've also got to make sure that you're
following the guidance and
uh and doing all the right things as the
people of liverpool uh were indeed
people are doing across the country so
it can definitely help and uh
to get to your point about you know how
can we do this in
of the forty percent of the country
that's uh alas currently in
in tier three how can we help them uh
into lower tiers
well uh yes we'll give the the the help
and support of the
uh armed services army where necessary
but you know it will take also
local leadership and uh local
communities coming together
to get those lateral flow tests out and
we're working as you can imagine right
now with parts of
the the country already various towns
already are coming forward saying they
want to do
what liverpool has already done but it
depends very much on
on communities coming together local
leaders saying they want to do it
uh because it's not something that we
want to be imposing you can't just
compel people
uh to take a test people need to
understand that this is
the way forward both for themselves and
for their communities and everybody
needs really to
to feel that and do it together as as
they did in in liverpool but
where there is local will as there are
there is in in doncaster or barnsley and
places like that
uh there uh we're certainly uh working
hard
uh to get it done and and uh you're
right about
uh the 2000 uh troops uh
but we will make sure that we uh we have
you know adequate
numbers of personnel uh to get it done
that the key thing will be making sure
over the months to come that we have
enough lateral flow tests and i can tell
you that at the moment
uh we've got huge huge uh stocks of of
them right now that we've
we've in in which we and we hope
eventually to make them
uh in this country ourselves in terms of
uh christmas i mean
christmas will increase the risk
everyone knows that it's and it's not a
that's not a secret at all uh and
um but that is not the main the only
risk over this next period at all
so we're going into the beginning of the
flu season very shortly potentially
we've got the most difficult period for
the nhs is always january and february
and march isn't particularly easy
usually for a whole bunch of reasons
that everybody again knows
ranging from more pneumonias through to
more slips and falls
so this is in that time of extreme
pressure so it certainly is not a time
of the year
leaving aside christmas where you'd want
to be taking reckless decisions
because things are going to be fairly
difficult as we've all made clear and
the prime minister has
to be made clear for several months now
and therefore we've got to
do on that basis so certainly we are
anticipating
christmas is an element of that but it
is only an element
and i think something which really we
must emphasize is the way to make sure
that christmas can both be enjoyed
but does not lead to a very large kick
up in the virus
is to make people sure people are very
serious going into it follow the
guidance
buy into it take it really seriously
during christmas don't do stupid things
don't do unnecessary things just because
the rules say you can
think sensibly and coming out of it also
be sensible and people have been
incredibly sensible incredibly
self-disciplined
all the way through this and all we
really want to say is please continue
that over this period and that doesn't
mean you can't enjoy yourself it just
means
you've got to take these sensible
precautions that i think most people
really do understand
bruh thank you very much uh dominic
yeatman metro
hi uh prime minister um is it
fair that air is in tier three hit by
pub and restaurant closures
will get support for those businesses
but none for the companies that depend
on them
and one for the scientists if i may
we've been told we have
huge huge stocks of mass testing
machines
and we've been promised a vaccine
roll-up within days of these tears
coming into force
will people stick to these rules do you
expect when the prime minister tells us
we have our foot on the throat of the
beast and the cavalry is now in sight
uh well dominic thank you on your uh
your question about
uh you know businesses associate i think
you mean in the supply chains of uh
of the hospitality industry you're quite
right to
uh to draw attention to them and and uh
they deserve protection
as well that's why we've instituted all
the uh the measures we have in terms of
the
uh the grants the three thousand pound
grants for businesses that are forced to
to close as a result of what is
happening the furlough scheme
uh which goes right the way through to
uh to march
uh the the cuts in in vat and in
in business rates and another another
1.1 billion pounds
for councils to support businesses in
their areas that are
that are in in trouble but you know the
best thing for all these companies
uh dominic the best thing for everybody
is for us to be able to get
uh them on their feet again get them
victoring supplying
the hospitality trade again all the
things that uh they depend on
and uh that depends on us being able to
get the virus done
uh in the way that i have uh described
and that we hope can happen
the vaccine as uh chris and patrick have
said
offers a real real hope and then there
is
this uh prospect now of of community
testing
as well combined with really tough
adherence to the uh the the the measures
we're announcing today
and don't forget as i said at the
beginning to laura you know whatever
people say about these measures
they they are very different uh from the
current lockdown there are there are
many more things that people many more
ways in which
economic activity can and will continue
can i say a word about the the cavalry i
mean
the the vaccines are looking really good
from what we've seen but they have yet
to go through a regulatory process
they're yet to get through to a stage
where we've got doses of them to
administer
um it's not going to be an overnight
thing to get that
implemented uh they're going to take a
month or so between doses
um you've got to have two doses of most
of these in order to then get the
immunity so that
we're not talking about suddenly getting
this switched off
anytime soon this is going to take
months into spring before we start to
get
uh significant degrees of vaccination to
create protection and on the
mass testing side testing is important
but of course it only matters if people
isolate as well
so it's about taking infected and
infectious people
out of circulation that isn't easy it's
really important and there's examples in
liverpool where this has been done
it's something that is going to be part
of what happens but it's not going to
solve the problem on its own
so in answer to your question i think if
any of us think that as a result of
those two
things we can relax now that would be
the wrong thing to do
and you've seen the graphs this was
rising very steeply in october
it got curtailed by the tears
particularly tier three
and it's been curtailed further by
national lockdown
if you take the brakes off now this will
get up and run away
and we'll be back in a situation of
growth so it's very important that we
don't
think that this is something that we can
now relax about
we will be able to when vaccination
comes in
and eventually gets a hold and gets the
immunity in place but that isn't now
anything i'd add to that is just
directly in addition to that on your
question
one of the really heartening things
about this whole
dreadful period of covid is the
extraordinary altruism of the british
public
who have been incredibly good at being
self-disciplined
and sticking to rules you know unseen
not forced
just sticking to them keeping to common
sense and they've done so
incredibly patiently over a long period
of time we do not see any evidence that
is not still true
of course you can always find if you go
far enough you'll be able to take some
photographs of some people who don't
but this is actually a very small
minority most people are very very good
at this
and they're doing it to protect other
people other people going to the nhs
other people their neighbors and they've
done it all the way through and i see no
evidence they're going to change that
they do need to understand the points
that patrick's making but the prime
minister has not been saying
this is just solved he's been saying
wait this is something which has got
time we can see an end to it but the end
is not now and we've really got to keep
keep that discipline and that sense of
altruism through to the point where
actually
we're better protected by medical
science which has been remarkable
and and and continues to be that that is
completely right well thank you very
much can we go to
uh ben glaze of the mirror please thank
you prime minister um same question to
all three of you please
do you really think it's a good idea
that's over christmas we can travel
hundreds of miles across the country
potentially from a tier three area to a
tier one area
and how can kiss elderly relatives who
we haven't seen for
nine months in many cases which one of
you will
specifically be doing that and then a
question specifically to professor
whitty
in answering an earlier question you
said in relation to christmas
don't do unnecessary things just because
you can
what sort of things did you have in mind
um well ben if i can just answer the the
general question
uh first look i think it's an incredibly
difficult
uh decision you've got to strike a
balance between
uh people's strong desire to celebrate
uh
a a family holiday perhaps one of the
most important
uh family holidays and the most
important family holiday of
of the of the year and which they
frankly going to uh to do anyway and
the need to keep the virus under control
so what we're trying to to set out with
the
uh the christmas measures that we've
agreed
across the whole of the uk because we
want everybody across the uk to be able
to travel
to see relatives is i think a sensible
balance but it depends i think as
chris and patrick have really tried to
stress in this session on all of us
you know being commonsensical and doing
the right thing
you know in the end uh as as as both
chris and patrick have just said until
the the vaccine comes
on stream uh you know we ask we are not
out of the woods yet
and we have to be we have to be very
very vigilant so everybody's individual
behavior at christmas will matter
a great deal in terms of um
my you know what i was saying about
christmas i think you gave a good
example actually
would i want someone to see their family
of course that's what christmas is about
whether people celebrate christmas as a
festival for themselves or from any
other
belief system it's a it's an opportunity
for families but
would i encourage someone to hug and
kiss their elderly relatives no i would
not
it's not against the law and that's the
whole point you can do it
within the rules that are there but it
does not make sense because you could be
carrying the virus and if you've got an
elderly relative
that would not be the thing you'd want
to do in the period where we're running
up to
a point where actually we might be able
to protect older people so i think
people just have to have
sense and i think this is but this is
very much what i think people will do
the fact that you can do something this
is true across so many other areas of
life
doesn't mean you should in answer to
your direct question about what i'll be
doing actually i'll be on the wards
i think keep numbers down don't do
things that are unnecessary as chris
said
try to make sure that you avoid
behaviors that would spread the disease
make sure that if you're in a house with
other households that you've got it well
ventilated and you take the precautions
keep distance where you can it's the
same basic rules that we need to apply
and i think you know it's difficult it's
not it's not going to be a normal
christmas but
if you want to make those connections
with family it has to be done in a way
where you try and make sure that you
don't increase the risk as chris said i
think hugging elderly relatives is not
something to get
to to go out and do this it it will
increase the spread to a vulnerable
population you want to survive to be
hugged again yeah thanks uh
very much ben let's go to liam thought
for the liverpool echo
good evening and prime minister it's two
questions for yourself really you've
spoken a lot today about the success
story that is
liverpool and the mass testing pilot but
there has been some concerns raised in
some parts of the city we've seen
in the poorest parts of liverpool
there's actually been quite a low take
up of the mass testing
part of this is because 80 percent of
people in some of these areas haven't
been able to qualify
for the emergency cash that they need to
be able to choose between
putting food on the table for their kids
and doing the right thing and
self-isolating
so will you learn from that will you
increase the funding available for
people when they do self-isolate because
this doesn't work
if people aren't able to isolate and
secondly
again you spoke about the spirit of the
people of liverpool the passion of the
people of liverpool and that's really
what's made this
a success and liverpool doesn't
necessarily have the best
relationship with the conservative party
and few areas have been hit harder by
the austerity of the past 10 years will
you remember the effort put in by the
people of liverpool by scousers
when it comes to the difficult decisions
on funding and local councils and
government
in the future yeah well definitely uh
liam i think that what's happened in
liverpool has been fantastic and i
i thank the people of liverpool and your
point about uh you know needing to
to reach everybody in the community is
absolutely right and
uh we're studying the uh the way the
liverpool experiment
uh went and and looking at what we can
do to
try to make sure we reach all groups
with these uh community testing
um efforts but i think it'd be probably
fair to say that it wasn't just
the testing that was a success in uh in
liverpool it was the
the way everybody seems to have pulled
together
to to do the right thing and to get the
get the virus down that's that's
that's our clear impression and i think
that's fantastic and
uh yes of course we'll be making sure
that we uh continue to
uh support liverpool and cities
throughout the uh the uk
and unite and level up across the whole
of the of the country and that's why
uh we'll we've uh we've not just putting
uh 4.6 billion into
supporting local government across uh
the uk but uh yesterday the chancellor
announced another four billion pound uh
leveling up funds so
uh liverpool everywhere else that's had
a tough time we're going to keep
supporting you throughout the copied and
and beyond
i don't think you had a question for for
crystal patrick okay everybody thank you
all very much thank you see you next
time
prime minister freshly out of
self-isolation of course bringing to an
end
that latest
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news